How race and identity are shaping politics, policy and power.
May 06, 2025
View in browser
By
Brakkton Booker and
Jesse Naranjo
What up, Recast fam! On today’s agenda:
Wes Moore says he’s not running for president, but it sure is looking that way
Arizona Sen. Ruben Gallego is raising 2028 suspicions with a visit to battleground Pennsylvania this weekend
Vice President Kamala Harris makes her Met Gala debut
Maryland Gov. Wes Moore speaks during a taping of "Fox News Sunday" at Fox News headquarters in Washington, March 23, 2025.
|
POLITICO illustration/Photo by AP
Maryland Gov. Wes Moore’s rhetoric and actions are doing little to quell the speculation that he’s eyeing higher office.
During his commencement speech in the key swing state of Pennsylvania over the weekend, he urged the graduates of Lincoln University, the historically Black institution his grandfather attended, to lean into a new brand of patriotism. Moore, who served in Afghanistan in the Army and rose to the rank of captain, argued that his definition of patriotism neither dwells on the nation’s gruesome past of slavery and Jim Crow nor carelessly embraces the notion of American exceptionalism. Instead, he said, patriotism today means loving your country and not lying about its complicated history, but allowing those hard truths about America’s past to be a guide on how to help shape it toward a more perfect future.
Lately, Moore has been doing a lot to boost his national profile.
In New York on Monday, he was honored by the Brennan Center for Justice for “his public and private sector service to advance justice, equity, and opportunity.” In his keynote address, Moore talked about when he first realized he wanted to defend the Constitution: He was 17 and had just enlisted in the Army when he swore an oath to uphold the then-208-year-old document. And last week, in an extended interview with the wildly popular “Breakfast Club” radio program, Moore gushed about being married to a Black woman, which he noted “a lot of my critics did not.”
These events — taken along with the news I broke on Friday that Moore will be headlining the South Carolina Democratic Party’s influential Blue Palmetto Dinner as well as attending Rep. Jim Clyburn’s (D-S.C.) high-profile annual fish fry — mean few are taking him at his word when he says: “I am clear — I’m not running.”
This statement may be unequivocal today but certainly allows plenty of wiggle room in the future.
It wouldn’t be the first time that a politician reversed course after insisting he wasn’t running for president. In 2006, then-Sen. Barack Obama took a somewhat playful, if not slightly annoyed tone when he told “Meet the Press” host Tim Russert, “I will serve out my full 6-year-term. … If you get asked enough, sooner or later you get weary and you start looking for new ways of saying things.” He of course launched his historic presidential campaign less than two years later and ultimately represented Illinois in the Senate for just four years total.
Was The Recast forwarded to you by a friend? Don't forget to subscribe to the newsletter here.
You'll get a weekly breakdown of how race and identity are the DNA of American politics and policy.
But Karen Finney, a longtime Democratic operative who worked on Hillary Clinton’s 2016 presidential campaign, is not reading too much into the thinking that Moore is kicking the tires on a 2028 White House run.
“I see it a little differently,” she said. “Gov. Moore is an important leader both in the Democratic Party and the country. … It’s also great to have his voice out there in different spaces, which reminds people that the leaders of our party are not just in Washington.”
In recent weeks, Moore, the nation’s only Black governor, has sharpened his critiques of President Donald Trump. He told The Recast on Sunday afternoon that while his focus remains on delivering for Maryland, he can’t simply ignore “these simps that continue to allow him to violate basic fundamentals of the Constitution.”
Moore speaks during a voter registration event Oct. 3, 2024, at Bowie State University in Maryland.
|
Francis Chung/POLITICO
He added: “Because Donald Trump thinks differently, they're now willing to compromise on all of their values, to be able to justify it.”
On Sunday, Trump sat down for an interview with Kristen Welker of “Meet the Press” to discuss his first 100 days in office. When Welker asked the president if everyone in the United States was entitled to the right of due process, both citizens and non-citizens as spelled out in the Constitution, Trump responded, “I don't know. I'm not, I'm not a lawyer. I don't know." Legal experts decried his response as “shocking.”
When asked about Trump’s interview, Moore said, “I think we need to be gone with the days where there's a pearl-clutching exercise every time he says something that's un-American. I'm actually not surprised he said it because he's already doing it.”
He pointed to the case of Kilmar Abrego Garcia, the Salvadoran man living in Maryland who was mistakenly deported to an El Salvador prison. The Supreme Court ordered the Trump administration to “facilitate” Abrego Garcia’s return. But Justice Department officials argue the Trump administration is not obligated to do anything other than adjust the man’s immigration status to admit him back to the U.S. — if El Salvador’s government decides to release him.
Moore reiterated his stance that Abrego Garcia needs to be returned to the U.S. to stand trial. He added that he was working closely with members of the Maryland congressional delegation as they seek to secure Abrego Garcia’s release independently of the administration.
His office confirmed the governor has no plans to travel to El Salvador.
Moore greets King Abdullah II of Jordan at the Maryland State House on Sept. 25, 2024, in Annapolis.
|
Stephanie Scarbrough/AP
While Moore remains a popular get for groups and platforms looking to elevate Democrats' emerging leaders, the first-term governor is facing some headwinds back home.
He’s likely going to get a gubernatorial primary challenge after he backed tax increases to help shore up a multibillion-dollar budget shortfall in the state. His state is also set to lose one of the NFL’s premier franchises, the Washington Commanders, who have played their home games in suburban Maryland since 1997, but will be moving the team back to Washington, D.C., in 2030. Moore’s also seen his approval rating tumble, according to a recent statewide survey, dropping to a 55 percent approval rating, down from 61 percent in January. His disapproval rating also ticked up to 36 percent in March, compared to just 28 percent at the beginning of the year.
While that may or may not be significant, it also may be a moot point should he signal a change of plans for a White House bid two years before that and win.
We’ll definitely keep you posted on Moore’s moves as we learn more.
All the best,The Recast Team
WHAT WE’RE WATCHING THIS WEEK
Then-Senate candidate Ruben Gallego speaks at a campaign event for Democratic presidential nominee Vice President Kamala Harris at Talking Stick Resort Amphitheatre, Thursday, Oct. 31, 2024, in Phoenix.
|
Matt York/AP
Gallego sparks 2028 speculation — Democratic Sen. Ruben Gallego won Arizona’s tightly contested Senate race last fall. This weekend, he’s heading to the nation’s biggest battleground: Pennsylvania. POLITICO’s Holly Otterbein reports the trip is billed as a way to pressure Republicans over possible Medicaid cuts. But it’s also fueling talk of a potential White House run.
What else we’re watching:
Rep. Robin Kelly announces Senate bid — The Chicago-area Democratic Rep. is the latest big name to jump into what is expected to be a crowded field to replace the retiring Dick Durbin, the No. 2 Democrat in the Senate. As POLITICO’s Shia Kapos points out, Illinois Lt. Gov. Juliana Stratton launched her bid last month and Reps. Raja Krishnamoorthi and Lauren Underwood are also thought to be eyeing bids.
Meet Daniel Lozano-Camargo — He’s a Houston man who was running a car detailing business — that is until the Trump administration declared him an “alien enemy” and quickly deported him to an El Salvador prison. Until this week, the man’s identity had not been revealed, POLITICO’s Josh Gerstein reports, and just like in the Abrego Garcia case, a judge ruled the man had been improperly deported and ordered his return to the U.S.
TODAY’S CULTURE RECS
Kamala Harris makes her Met Gala debut — Harris, who continues to mull a gubernatorial run in California or another White House bid, donned a custom black and white full-length dress by Off-White, designed by the label’s creative director IB Kamara.
The theme of this year’s Met Gala was "Superfine: Tailoring Black Style," a celebration of Black Dandyism. Pop star Rihanna made a debut herself, showing off her latest baby bump. See all the dazzling styles here.
In other news… “Sinners” falls to the No. 2 spot at the box office but nears the $250 million mark in global ticket sales.
Former first lady Michelle Obama bats down divorce rumors, again.
And jury selection resumes in the federal sex trafficking criminal trial of Sean “P. Diddy” Combs in New York today.
Edited by Teresa Wiltz and Ben Weyl
Follow us on X
Brakkton Booker @brakktonbooker
Rishika Dugyala @rishikadugyala
Teresa Wiltz @teresawiltz
Jesse Naranjo @jesselnaranjo
Follow us
To change your alert settings, please log in at
https://login.politico.com/?redirect=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.politico.com/settings
This email was sent to politicollector@gmail.com by: POLITICO 1000 Wilson Blvd Arlington, VA, 22209, USA
Unsubscribe | Privacy Policy | Terms of Service